---
title: My first impressions of Palworld
date: 2024-01-21
---

I have no idea how to describe
[Palworld](https://store.steampowered.com/app/1623730/?curator_clanid=4777282&utm_source=SteamDB)
adequately other than it is a miracle of game design that it works as
well as it does. On paper, this game should be bad. It shouldn't work
at all. It should have a bunch of attempts at game design that don't
work together and the game should fizzle out into irrelevance like all
the others in the same category. This game should just be too damn
ambitious to work.

Somehow, everything works. It doesn't just work, it works VERY WELL.
Everything flows together and all the mechanics feed into eachother.
It's all the addictive qualities of Factorio, Ark, Fortnite, and more
all in one. On the weekends I normally catch up on anime, but I am now
very behind because of how much time this game has been sucking up.

If you want to see how incredibly unlikely the success of Palworld
was, check out [this post by my friend
Mystes](https://cohost.org/mystes/post/4226698-i-m-in-love-with-pal)
where it describes the series of fortunate events that lead to this
game landing the way it did. It's nuts. This game is the best kind of
anomaly.

There's some controversy about the fact that you can catch Palapagos
residents in Pal Spheres, with all of the normal effects in the
process, but I think that this is really the game taking its lore
seriously and presenting it to the player as it would be in the world.
In the Pokémon games, most of the gorier Pokédex entries point to the
realities that this game portrays.

If you lived in a world where cows were moe blobs that make cute
noises, you'd probably be fine with butchering them for dinner. Either
that or you'd live in a system such that it would be very okay and
easy to do so.

It's really easy to compare this to Pokemon, but I think that it's a
lot more fair to compare it to RimWorld and Ark: Survival. This makes
the Pokemon games look like Monster Hunter. Looking back at Pokémon
Legends Arceus, I think that the Pokémon games are probably going to
become more like Monster Hunter in the long run. Monster Hunter is
incredibly fun to play with friends and overall it's got really
detailed mechanics. The main difference with this and Pokémon is that
you can theoretically go for a very long time without engaging with
the monster taming mechanic. You'll have challenges getting past Zoe,
sure, but you'll be able to do it.

For an "early access" title, this is a remarkably polished and stable
experience. This is the best UE5 game I've ever seen run on handhelds
like the Steam Deck and the ROG Ally. The only complaints I have are
things that probably can be fixed with time and polish. The fact that
they've sold so many units already means that this studio will have
the resources to bring this to completion. I'm confident that the core
of this game is good enough that all they need to do is fix lots of
little issues with the implementation.

When can you say that a new game this decade shipped with dedicated
server software? That you could host yourself, and type in the direct
IP of a server to connect to it, without having to do matchmaking or
suffering through abortions of lobby systems? This game is amazing.

It's seriously good. I don't know what else to say other than with
friends it's an amazing way to manufacture brand new sentences that
become memes.

If this keeps getting better, I could easily see it being game of the
year. I'd be amazed if it doesn't win something in The Game Awards
this year. It sets the bar very high and I think they'll see it to
fruition.
