---
title: "New Year's Resolutions"
date: 2023-12-31
type: blog
---

<XeblogVideo path="video/2023/new-years-resolution" />

Hi, it's Xe. At the time of recording, it's 11.30pm on New Year's
Eve, and I just wanted to record something about New Year's
resolutions and specifically what mine is for the next year.

Over the last year, my New Year's resolution could be summed up in,
like, a couple words. Get over my fear of public speaking. Get over my
fear of being a jackass on stage and talking about things that are
funny, engaging in ways that teach people things fundamental about
computer science.

I am fairly confident to say that I have made a huge impact on that,
if not basically gotten over the most of it, and the rest of it is
really just, like, smoothing out the logistics of actually doing
things, actually recording things, all of that.

I think I know what my resolution for 2023 is going to be.

Historically, I've been kind of afraid of doing video for my blog, I'm
afraid of video because of how permanent it is, how much effort it is
to change things. With blog posts you edit a couple words here and
there, and then bam, your message is completely different.

But video has a lot more intention behind it. It has a lot more
editing. It has a lot more steps.

I want to get over my fear of looking like a jackass on video. I'm
going to work on that.

And the way I'm going to work on that is by doing it, putting
myself out there, being vulnerable, and just seeing what happens.

It's kind of actually terrifying to make this kind of resolution out
in front of a bunch of people, you know, in this sort of intimate face
cam style. I usually use a v-tubing rig because, well, my hair is
super greasy right now.

This is totally unfiltered. I don't even have a script right now. I
normally script basically everything that I do in video to an inch of
my life. I script the hand gestures that I do.

I want to change that. I want to be a bit more spontaneous. I want to
basically just create for the love of creation.

My resolution for this year is to put out a video once a month.

Oh, and as an aside, to stop using GitHub Gists because there's a
whole story there that I'm probably going to make the first video of
the new year. It's got action, danger, and accidentally getting on the
front page of Twitter by getting on my gist links tweeted by Elon
Musk, then finding out that the GitHub Gists product has been
effectively abandoned by the team because nobody got promoted working
on it. So I had to delete the gist because at the time of me being
unemployed, having a bunch of people on Twitter looking into my
history probably wouldn't be for the best. You can understand, right?

Thanks for sticking with me. Thanks for believing. And let's see if I
can get this video out before New Year's.
