---
title: "The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom is 10/10"
date: 2023-12-07
type: blog
index: true
tags:
  - totk
  - botw
  - NintendoSwitch
  - review
---

export const PercentageRing = ({ percentage }) => {
  let color = "green";
  if (percentage < 50) {
    color = "red";
  }
  if (percentage < 80) {
    color = "yellow";
  }
  return (
    <div className="relative inline-block mt-2 ml-20 md:ml-6">
      <div
        className={`w-36 md:w-48 h-36 md:h-48 bg-bg-2 dark:bg-bgDark-2 border-8 border-${color}-light dark:border-${color}Dark-light rounded-full`}
      >
        <div
          className="absolute top-0 left-0 w-full h-full border-8 border-green-500 rounded-full"
          style={{
            clip: `rect(0, 1em, 1em, ${(percentage / 100) * 2}em)`,
          }}
        ></div>
      </div>
      <div className="absolute inset-0 flex items-center justify-center">
        <span className="text-2xl md:text-4xl font-bold">
          {percentage / 10}/10
        </span>
      </div>
    </div>
  );
};

export const ThreeColumnLayout = ({ children }) => {
  return (
    <div className="flex justify-center not-prose bg-bg-1 dark:bg-bgDark-1 rounded-md w-fit mx-auto md:p-4 p-2">
      <div className="grid grid-cols-1 md:grid-cols-3 max-w-3xl place-items-center flex items-center justify-center">
        {children}
      </div>
    </div>
  );
};

export const Col = ({ title, children }) => {
  return (
    <div
      className={`bg-bg-1 dark:bg-bgDark-1 px-2 h-full place-content-center w-full mx-auto`}
    >
      {title && <h2 className="text-2xl font-semibold mb-2 mt-2">{title}</h2>}
      {children}
    </div>
  );
};

<div className="my-4">
  <XeblogVideo path="video/2023/totk-review" />
</div>

2023 has been full of bangers in the video game department. There have
been so many good games that have been released this year that it's
difficult to actually rate any of them. Much less coming up with a
game that is, "the game of the year". One of the most frustratingly
difficult games to rate has been this year's release of The Legend of
Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom.

Don't get me wrong here. This is actually a really good game on its
own rights. This game is S tier, generation defining, and probably one
of the best games ever made. The main problem with trying to rate this
game is that it's so easy to compare it to the previous release the
Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. It is not fair to the developers
or to the user experience to compare the two games, but they are so
similar that it's almost impossible not to.

The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild was the fire that the industry
needed in order to make open world games fun again. You can see such a
stark difference in the types of open world games that have been
developed and released before Breath of the Wild came out and after
Breath of the Wild came out. The development team behind Breath of the
Wild redefined open-world games so much that it's difficult to express
how they used to be. Even though they were called "open world" games,
they were really just a railroaded set of instructions on how to free
different parts of the place from some nebulous oppressor.

<XeblogPicture path="video/2023/totk-review/Fv5rJa3aMAEJnlV" />

Breath of the Wild changed this. It was a truly open world game. It is
not open world as in you had freedom of movement between objectives.
It is open world as in you are dumped into Hyrule with little to no
context of what's going on and told to kill Ganon. If you wanted to,
you could immediately get through the tutorial and then run to the
castle to kill Ganon in thirty minutes. It takes a lot of restraint in
order to give the player that much freedom.

It is a game that does not drown you in tutorials or "Mega Man, Mega
Man, you have to shoot the enemy with your Mega Buster!" It simply
dumps you into the world, gives you stuff, and shows you that you must
figure it all out for yourself.

After several hundred hours in Breath of the Wild, I have really come
to appreciate this game. It is going to be a special game in my heart
for a long time. It is the defining game of the Switch generation.

This year, Nintendo finally released the sequel to Breath of the Wild,
Tears of the Kingdom after a seven year wait. The Legend of Zelda:
Tears of the Kingdom, takes all of the basic systems from Breath of
the Wild and then enhances them so much that it's almost a completely
separate game.

<XeblogPicture path="video/2023/totk-review/GAstJHraUAApSWx" />

In the process of developing this game, Nintendo fixed core aspects of
interactive world physics like gear interaction. Most of the stuff
that Nintendo casually does in this game is either impossible or
almost unsolved problems in other facets of the gaming industry. You
are able to assemble vehicles that you can ride around without the
vehicles flying apart or turning into physics cannons.

They made the user experience of the game so good that it fades away
to nothing and feels like it should have just been that way the entire
time. This allows them to have a very subtle design that is very
effective for the kind of game they are trying to make, but because it
is so subtle it ends up looking shallow compared to its older brother.

In a difficulty sense, Tears of the Kingdom rests between Breath of
the Wild's normal mode, and master mode from the DLC. When you step
into the world of Hyrule for the first time, you feel utterly
powerless. Relatively minor threats kill you instantly if you're not
careful. Your early weapons are disposable and the game reminds you of
that constantly by taking them away from you almost as soon as you get
them. It is simultaneously all the best parts of open world games and
Dark Souls put into one. In order to survive, you must be clever. You
must take the systems that you are given and use them to your
advantage in order to thrive.

<XeblogPicture path="video/2023/totk-review/GAsr5e4bsAAnJSj" />

And then they give you systems that allow you to break the game in
amazing ways while still retaining balance. One of the main examples
of this is the Fuse ability. Fuse lets you connect objects to your
weapons, arrows, and shields.

This is a very subtle tool that allows you to get away with a lot of
crazy things. One of the main weaknesses of Breath of the Wild was the
lack of variety in weapons. There were a bunch of archetypes of
weapons and some minor ways that they could be modified. But
realistically there were only 40 weapons in the entire game. Some of
those weapons were useful, others were situational, some were
obviously joke weapons. But overall, everybody had the same build by
the end of the game.

Tears of the Kingdom expands Link's arsenal through a method that can
only be described as combinatorial explosion. If you have a wooden
stick and a Korok leaf, you can combine them to create a weapon that
allows you to blow away enemies; much like the Korok leaf from the
first game, except you can make this one single-handed.

<XeblogPicture path="video/2023/totk-review/GAssF3raYAAlYa6" />

As an example, consider how the Korok leaf works in Breath of the Wild.

This weapon is a random drop from trees when you cut them down. It is
a situational tool that led to you blow away enemies off of cliffs and
kill them instantly, but when you hit enemies with it, it only does
one damage. One of the main annoyances about pulling this thing out is
that it's a two-handed weapon, so you can't have a shield active. This
means that this weapon is simultaneously overpowered and balanced
because you can use it to do amazing things situationally.

Now consider the same weapon in Tears of the Kingdom. In tears of the
kingdom, the Korok leaf is not a bespoke weapon, it is a part that can
be fused to other weapons. Including arrows.

This is a very subtle change that allows you to get away with a lot of
fun. Before you could only use the Korok leaf to blow away enemies
that were close to you. But now that you can attach them to arrows,
you can use them to blow away enemies from anywhere. If you attach it
to a wooden stick, you now have the ability to blow away enemies
without giving up your shield.

Now consider this level of customization but for everything in the
game. This means that everybody's endgame build is entirely different.

<XeblogPicture path="video/2023/totk-review/FwC9heWaQAALpEw" />

One of the other big things that they fixed in tears of the kingdom
was Link's movement. Breath of the Wild has a fantastic movement
system. A lot of the time when you're playing the game, you don't even
notice that there's a movement system involved. However, when you get
to the point where you beat the first dungeon, you unlock the ability
called Revali's Gale. This allows you to create a jetstream that
pushes you upward and makes a lot of the climbing irrelevant.

I'm not going to deny, this change does actually make the game a bit
more fun in a lot of ways. It removes a lot of the boring parts of
climbing. It means that it's easier to get up taller spaces. But you
end up having to wait for it to recharge. This means that a lot of
your time is spent running around and waiting so that you can fly
upwards again and then run around some more.

Tears of the kingdom fixes this by removing Revali's Gale and instead
giving you tools that you can use to craft a better climbing build.
They added sticky lizards which let you build potions that increase
your adherence to surfaces. They also buffed the climbing gear so that
it gives you more speed than it used to. And movement speed potions
still work as normal. This makes climbing more fun than Revali's gale,
but it does require a lot of work to get there.

At the same time though, they did give you the ability to make
climbing even more powerful through the use of Ultrahand. Ultrahand is
a tool that lets you combine objects into vehicles and then ride them.
This can let you turn a couple of fans and a control stick into a
hover bike that lets you fly around wherever you want.

<XeblogPicture path="video/2023/totk-review/GAsrbIrbgAAIO22" />

At some level, this bike is literally just two fans, a control stick,
and some clever placement. It is fairly trivial to make, very cheap in
terms of the Zonaite that it costs to create it, and it is the best
tool to fly around Hyrule with. But when you are using it, you are
both completely defenseless and you are limited by the battery that
you have.

This is much better than Revali's Gale ever was because it is not just
a cheap tool that removes all of the fun of movement. This lets you
finesse your own way to creating a better way to move things. This is
something that you can use to create your own fun.

Now that I'm going through the motion of writing all of this out, I
wonder if a lot of the reasons why I don't want to call Tears of the
Kingdom one of the best games of all time is because I have nostalgia
for the first game in the series. Breath of the Wild was such an
amazing and expansive game that it really changed what video games
mean to me. Tears of the kingdom is a fantastic game, but because of
all of this nostalgia for the first game, I don't know if it's really
ever going to be able to compare.

The two games complement each other perfectly. One is a sonnet of
possibilities. The other is a swan song of progress. They are both
amazing games in completely different ways. I will be playing both of
these games for years to come, and I can't wait to eventually 100% my
Tears of the Kingdom file.

<ThreeColumnLayout>
  <Col>
    <PercentageRing percentage={100} />
  </Col>
  <Col title="Pros">
    <ul className="list-disc list-inside">
      <li>Game of the year material</li>
      <li>Total mechanical freedom</li>
      <li>Flawless execution</li>
    </ul>
  </Col>
  <Col title="Cons">
    <ul className="list-disc list-inside">
      <li>Too easy to compare to Breath of the Wild</li> 
      <li>Aging Switch hardware could use a refresh</li>
    </ul>
  </Col>
</ThreeColumnLayout>

The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom is my open world game of the
year for 2023. It is a 10 out of 10 experience. It's something that is
well worth owning and worth the $70 price tag. If you have a Switch,
you should definitely pick it up. If you don't have a switch already,
you should buy one just to play Breath of the Wild and Tears of the
Kingdom.
