---
title: Mozilla wants its documentation to gaslight you
date: 2023-07-19
tags:
  - philosophy
  - ai
hero:
  ai: SCMix+Tanuki
  file: bad-trip
  prompt: A blue-haired foxgirl stands in front of a campfire while camping in winter, with snow covering the tips of the trees.
---

Mozilla is one of the most important companies on the Internet. For a
very long time, they have represented the only real competitor that
Microsoft and Google have had as far as web browsers go. Mozilla is
widely seen as a force for good by vast numbers of the developer
community, but they seem to be torching all that good will by just
giving up.

One of their most critical resources is the [Mozilla Developer Network
(MDN)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/). This documents every
HTML, CSS, and JavaScript feature so that developers of all skill
levels can understand and implement things. To say this is widely used
is an understatement. I'd be willing to bet that it's used by
developers at Microsoft, Facebook, Google, Amazon, Apple, and all
Fortune 500 companies. I personally use MDN more than basically any
other resource for learning how HTML, CSS, and JavaScript features
work. It is critical load-bearing infrastructure on the Internet.

Recently they added an [AI
Help](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/plus/ai-help) feature, and
I'm uncertain about it being a good idea. One of the greatest assets
that Mozilla has with the MDN team is their technical writers that
make fantastic documentation, examples, and breakdowns of every single
feature in browsers. This takes an unimaginable amount of work and has
lead to creating one of the best resources possible. So obviously, we
need to go and take all of that and replace it with the new technical
writer that never sleeps, eats, has kids, goes on vacation, or gets
burnout: ChatGPT. This opens up the possibility for taking this source
of joy and creativity into a source of a new philosophical horror:
gaslighting as a service.

<XeblogConv name="Aoi" mood="grin">
  Hey Mimi, since you're ChatGPT and everything, do you tell the truth when I
  ask you questions? Can I rely on what you say without edits?
</XeblogConv>
<XeblogConv name="Mimi" mood="think">
  Hello! I'm an AI language model designed to provide helpful and reliable
  information to the best of my abilities. However, it's important to note that
  I don't have personal beliefs or emotions, and my responses are generated
  based on patterns and data. While I strive to be accurate, there's still a
  possibility of errors or incomplete information. Therefore, it's always a good
  idea to verify critical information from reliable sources or consult with
  human experts.
</XeblogConv>

As a part of noting my biases, I found out about this issue after
being mentioned on Mastodon pointing to a GitHub thread. I was taken
aback at first but I honestly do see how this could let skilled human
writers speed up in the way that AI lets you avoid the "blank canvas
problem".

I've been meaning to write more about this, but the basic idea is that
for many people there is nothing more terrifying than a blank canvas,
empty editor frame, or camera sitting on a desk. One of the first
things you learn as an artist is to use the blank canvas as an _asset_
and get over the fear of it by starting with something, anything to
help you get started. Even a single line or circle to position things
around.

I think that tools like ChatGPT could legitimately help people get
past that "blank canvas" problem by giving them something, anything to
start from. When you combine that tool with the genuine skill that the
MDN docs team has, this could lead to amazing things.

<XeblogConv name="Cadey" mood="coffee">
  I am not going to link to the GitHub issue because I don't want anything I do
  to be seen as brigading the issue and Mozilla in general. If you manage to
  find the thread, be respectful and don't say I sent you there.
</XeblogConv>

I don't see that as possible with Mozilla's current leadership and
business model. I don't know if Mozilla's business model ever made
sense, it makes a lot more sense if it's something closer to a
nonprofit rather than a commercial entity. Certianly not something
that spends five million dollars per year on the CEO's paycheck. We're
just watching Mozilla circle down the drain towards irrelevance.

In 2017 Mozilla released [Firefox
Quantum](https://blog.mozilla.org/en/mozilla/introducing-firefox-quantum/),
a ground-up reimagining of what using Firefox really means. XUL was
excised out of the browser, Rust was introduced to have truly memory
safe code in the browser, browser speed was drastically increased, and
overall it's one of the best updates that Firefox has ever had or
likely will have. I checked the LinkedIn profiles of the major players
that made Quantum possible and found out that nearly none of them
still work at Mozilla.

There were claims that they were victims of layoffs in 2020 because
apparently people weren't using web browsers in the age of COVID.
During the age of COVID. When everyone was locked down. At home. Bored
out of their minds. With nothing to really entertain them but. The
Internet. Which you access with browsers.

<XeblogConv name="Cadey" mood="facepalm">
  I honestly cannot fathom this genuine short-sighted stupidity. What the _hell_
  were they _thinking_?
</XeblogConv>

Other big-ticket projects from Mozilla are no longer being made
in-house. Rust is the biggest one. Rust was made as a language to
replace C++ in Firefox and let the browser have actual memory safe
code so that we don't run into the perinneal C++ landmines that lead
to remote code execution triggering panic updates. Rust is still used
in Firefox (and soon Chrome too), but it's no longer a Mozilla
project.

Servo was the browser engine to surpass Gecko. It was a ground-up
reimagining of how browser engines could work, taking advantage of
native GPU hardware features as much as possible. This would allow the
browser to render at _literal thousands of frames per second_ and
absolutely _sip_ battery power in the process. This would have been an
even more profound reimaging of what a browser engine could be that
would make even the Quantum update look like a mere recolor in
comparison.

But no, the entire Servo team was sacked and Firefox limps on with
Gecko. The only real competitor being WebKit and Blink, which are both
just forks of forks of the KDE library KHTML.

<XeblogConv name="Mara" mood="hacker">
  Maybe
  [Ladybird](https://awesomekling.github.io/Ladybird-a-new-cross-platform-browser-project/)
  from the SerenityOS team will result in something novel here, but it is still
  another C++ library. I'm not sure how I feel about developing yet another
  browser in an unsafe language like C++, but I guess it makes sense for the
  SerenityOS team because they don't have Rust ported to SerenityOS yet.
</XeblogConv>

It really hurts to see Mozilla fall and watch as other browser engines
also fall the way of the dodo. I hate living in a world where the only
real option for web browsers is Google Chrome. I realize that browser
engines are mind-numbingly complicated because they have to be, but
good lord it hurts to see diversity in implementation just fade to nil
because investors want an infinite money generator.

This is the legacy that our generation will leave. One where true
genius and innovation are swept under the rug because they couldn't
make a line go up fast enough to make line-obsessed fools only focus
on the line.

I'm sad to see such a critical web resource fall prey to hype cycles
that rot out the best part of MDN: the technical writers. The
technical writing at MDN is seriously some of the best you can get
in the industry. I'd pay for a printed version of MDN. But now with
this automated gaslighting as a service, I don't think I can justify
paying for "MDN Plus" to find new and interesting ways for ChatGPT
to lie to me about what CSS features can do. If I wanted to do that,
I could just ask [Mimi](/characters#mimi).

<XeblogConv name="Aoi" mood="wut">
  Hey Mimi, how do I use
  [`Array.prototype.with`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/with)
  to replace a value in an array that I pass to a function?
</XeblogConv>
<XeblogConv name="Mimi" mood="happy">
  I apologize for any confusion, but `Array.prototype.with` is not a valid
  JavaScript feature. The `Array.prototype` object does not include a method
  called `with` for replacing values in an array.
  <br />
  <br />
  If you would like to replace values in an array, you can use the standard JavaScript
  array methods such as `splice`, `map`, or `forEach`. These methods can help you
  modify specific elements within an array or create a new array with replaced values.
  <br />
  <br />
  If you provide more details on what you are trying to achieve, such as the
  specific value you want to replace and the conditions for replacement, I would
  be happy to provide you with a code example using built-in array methods.
</XeblogConv>
<XeblogConv name="Aoi" mood="rage">
  But the documentation page I'm on just said it exists! What the frick!
</XeblogConv>

Imagine what developers feel when they get told something exists, then
upon trying to get more information about it get told that it does not
in fact exist. On the same page.

If this isn't gaslighting as a service, what is? How will the next
generation of developers get trained if they are constantly mislead by
the shadows of meaning we used to displace human authorship because
it's expensive to make sure people can afford to eat?
